ACADEMIC CREDENTIALS POLICY Policy 1.0 Definitions 1.1 The following words and expressions shall have the meanings hereby assigned to them: 1.1.1 Academic Credentials: a certification of qualifications issued by a post-secondary institution, recognized by the Qatar Ministry of Education and Higher Education, indicating that an Academic Member successfully completed a particular course of study at a specified degree level (e.g. Diplomas, Bachelor’s, Master’s, Doctorate degree or other Terminal Degree). 1.1.2 Academic Members: Faculty Members and Instructional Members. 1.1.3 Faculty Members: members of the teaching and/or research staff, whether on part- or full-time, holding the following ranks: Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Senior Lecturer/Senior Technical Instructor, or Lecturer/Technical Instructor. 1.1.4 Instructional Members: Members of the teaching staff, whether on part- or full-time, holding the following titles: Assistant Lecturer/or Workshop/Lab/Clinical Instructor, Assistant Technical Instructor, Trades Technical Instructor, or Teaching Assistant. 1.1.5 Professional Certification: A document indicating mastery of or competency in specific knowledge, skills or processes that can be measured against a set of accepted standards, which are typically awarded through assessment and validation of skills in cooperation with a business, trade association or other industry group. 1.1.6 Professional Credentials: A document issued by a responsible and authorized body that attests that an individual has achieved specific experience relative to a given standard, including licenses, badges, and Professional Certifications. 1.1.7 University: University of Doha for Science and Technology established by Emiri Resolution No. 13 of 2022. 1.2 Where the context requires, words importing the singular shall include the plural and vice-versa. 1.3 Where a word or phrase is given a particular meaning, other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or phrase have corresponding meanings. 2.0 Policy Purpose 2.1 This policy outlines the requirements for the provision and verification of Academic Credentials at the University. The policy aims to ensure employment of competent Academic Members, qualified to accomplish the vision and mission of the University. 3.0 Policy Scope 3.1 This policy applies to all Academic Members at the University. 4.0 Policy Statement 4.1 Prospective Academic Members must provide evidence of all acquired Academic Credentials prior to entering an employment agreement with the University. 4.2 Academic Members must meet the minimum Academic Credential requirements mandated by the State of Qatar Ministry of Education and Higher Education, the University’s accreditation agencies, and regulatory bodies. 4.3 The candidate is responsible for submitting their Academic Credentials to verify that he or she holds an appropriate degree and any other academic or Professional Credentials/Certification required for the position. Academic Credentials evidenced by original, official, sealed academic official transcripts, must be released directly to the University by the awarding institution. 4.4 Any offer of employment to a prospective Academic Member must be made contingent on verification of necessary Academic Credentials. A candidate's failure to provide required documentation in a timely manner or falsification or misrepresentation of Academic Credentials will render the offer of employment null and void, and, where applicable, subject the appointment to discipline up to and including termination. 4.5 Academic Credentials are one of multiple means through which the University verifies the qualifications of Academic Members. Specific qualification requirements for Academic Members are outlined in the Academic Qualifications Policy. 4.6 Documentation of Academic Member Academic Credentials is updated periodically, as defined in the relevant procedures. 4.7 All Academic Credentials must be attested by the relevant authorities as prescribed in the relevant procedures. 5.0 Procedures 5.1 The Vice-President, Academics will ensure that procedures are developed and implemented in accordance with this policy. 6.0 Related Documents 6.1 PL-AC-03: Academic Qualifications Policy 6.2 PR-AC-02: Academic Credentials Procedure PL-AC-02: Academic Credentials Policy © June 2019