ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS POLICY Policy1.0 Definitions 1.1 The following words and expressions shall have the meanings hereby assigned to them: 1.1.1 Academic Credentials: a certification of qualifications issued by a postsecondary institution, recognized by the Qatar Ministry of Education and Higher Education, indicating that an Academic Member successfully completed a particular course of study at a specified degree level (e.g. Diplomas, Bachelor’s, Master’s, Doctorate degree or other Terminal Degree). 1.1.2 Academic Members: Faculty Members and Instructional Members. 1.1.3 Academic Rank: The rank held by the Academic Members in the University, having hierarchical titles such as Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Senior Lecturer, Senior Technical Instructor, Lecturer, Technical Instructor, Assistant Lecturer, Workshop/Lab/Clinical Instructor, Assistant Technical Instructor, Trades Technical Instructor, and Teaching Assistant 1.1.4 Certificate: A document awarded upon the successful completion of a brief course of study, usually one year or less but at times longer, primarily in institutions of higher education, university extension programs or non-degree granting postsecondary institutions like area career and technical education schools, as well as for participation, completion, or attainment of competencies. 1.1.5 Course: A set of Learning Sessions in a particular subject, with a defined scope and duration, and specific learning outcomes 1.1.6 Course Learning Outcome: The specifications of what the Student should learn as the result of the specified and supported study in a given Course. 1.1.7 Faculty Members: Members of the teaching and/or research staff, whether on part- or full-time, holding the following titles: Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Senior Lecturer/Senior Technical Instructor, or Lecturer/Technical Instructor. 1.1.8 Instructional Members: Members of the teaching staff, whether on part- or fulltime, holding the following titles: Assistant Lecturer/or Workshop/Lab/Clinical Instructor, Assistant Technical Instructor, Trades Technical Instructor, or Teaching Assistant. 1.1.9 Learning Session: Classes, labs, placements or work term prescribed by a Course. 1.1.10 President: The President of the University, as nominated by the Board of Trustees and appointed by the Minister of Education and Higher Education as the President of the University. 1.1.11 Professional Certification: A document indicating mastery of or competency in specific knowledge, skills or processes that can be measured against a set of accepted standards, which are typically awarded through assessment and validation of skills in cooperation with a business, trade association or other industry group. 1.1.12 Professional Credentials: A document issued by a responsible and authorized body that attests that an individual has achieved specific experience relative to a given standard, including licenses, badges, and Professional Certifications. 1.1.13 Program: A prescribed set of Courses leading to a qualification, including a Certificate, Diploma (2 years), Advanced Diploma (3 years), Bachelor, Master, or Doctorate, according to the Qatar National Qualifications Framework. 1.1.14 Research: The systematic and organized investigation of a subject/topic, and study of the materials and sources in order to establish new knowledge and/or reach new conclusions. 1.1.15 Student: A person who is presently enrolled at the University in a credit Course or who is designated by the University as a Student. 1.1.16 Teaching: The delivery of theoretical and/or practical instruction for the purpose of Student learning and development, that is generally organized by disciplines and/or interdisciplinarity of study and administered within an established mode and timeframe. 1.1.17 Terminal Degree: The highest degree awarded in a given discipline. 1.1.18 University: University of Doha for Science and Technology established by Emiri Resolution No. 13 of 2022. 1.2 Where the context requires, words importing the singular shall include the plural and vice-versa. 1.3 Where a word or phrase is given a particular meaning, other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or phrase have corresponding meanings. 2.0 Policy Purpose 2.1 This policy outlines the academic and professional qualifications required of Academic Members working at the University. 2.2 This policy also reflects the University’s compliance with the requirements and the credential standards stipulated by accreditation agencies, regulatory bodies, and State of Qatar Ministry of Education and Higher Education and relevant international practices. 3.0 Policy Scope 3.1 This policy applies to all Academic Members at the University. 4.0 Policy Statement 4.1 The University employs qualified Academic Members to achieve its mission, mandate, and commitment to stakeholders. Students in all University Programs have a right to be taught by appropriately qualified Academic Members. Sponsors and employers trust the University to prepare learners with the knowledge, skills and abilities required by the labour market. The establishment of minimum Academic Member qualifications is also a means of ensuring competence, relevance, currency and quality in instructional delivery 4.2 The University’s mandate as an academic, applied, technical and vocational institution of higher education levels, requires that Academic Members have essential minimum qualifications 4.3 Academic Members must meet the University’s requirements, as outlined in the approved job descriptions, to teach in their discipline and the requirements of applicable accreditation agencies and regulatory bodies. 4.4 Academic Members must hold the minimum required qualifications to teach in their respective disciplines. Qualified Academic Members are identified by Academic Credentials, employment and/or teaching experience and, where relevant, Professional Credentials and Certification. 4.5 Honors and awards, continuous documented excellence in Teaching, or other demonstrated and documented competencies and achievements that contribute to effective Teaching and Course Learning Outcomes, may also be considered by the University in determining Academic Member qualification. 4.6 Qualification Types 4.6.1 Academic Members require the following types of qualifications: 4.6.1.1 Academic Credentials 4.6.1.1.1 Where the Academic Member achieved the required Academic Credentials within the relevant discipline; 4.6.1.2 Employment Experience 4.6.1.2.1 Industry employment experience: Where the Academic Member was a practitioner/professional within the relevant discipline in the industry, practicing within the appropriate and relevant scope, for a minimum of three (3) years; 4.6.1.2.2 Academic employment experience: Where the Academic Member has met the relevant Teaching experience in an academic institution or certified training center (excluding Faculty Members), as defined under each Academic Rank in the related Assigning Academic Ranks to Academic Members Procedure (PR-AC-03); and 4.6.1.3 Professional Credentials and Certification 4.6.1.3.1 Where the Academic Member is Teaching in a discipline that requires Professional Credentials and Certification, accreditation, registration, or licensure, holds that accreditation, registration or license, and maintains its currency throughout employment at the University. 4.7 Ranking and Qualification Requirements 4.7.1 Academic Ranks and qualification requirements, as defined in the related Assigning Academic Ranks to Academic Members Procedure (PR-AC-03) are as follows: 4.7.1.1 Professor, Associate Professor, and Assistant Professor 4.7.1.1.1 Requires a Terminal Degree in the relevant discipline area, employment experience, and evidence of being current and competent in the relevant Teaching field and in Research. 4.7.1.2 Senior Lecturer/Senior Technical Instructor and Lecturer/Technical Instructor 4.7.1.2.1 Requires at least a Master’s degree in the relevant discipline, employment experience, and evidence of being current and competent in the relevant field and in Research. 4.7.1.3 Assistant Lecturer/or Workshop/Lab/Clinical Instructor, Assistant Technical Instructor, Trades Technical Instructor, or Teaching Assistant 4.7.1.3.1 Requires at least a Bachelors’ degree (Diploma degree may be considered in special circumstances) or trades designation in the relevant discipline, employment experience, and relevant Professional Credentials and Certification for disciplines that require Professional Credentials and Certification. 4.7.2 The University’s Programs, which are comprised of theoretical, practical, and work-integrated components, require an appropriate mix of qualified Academic Members (from the above noted Academic Ranks) to support Students in their knowledge and competency-development within the relevant disciplinary area. 4.8 Any exceptions to 4.7 must be based on: 4.8.1 The absence of a related program credential at the graduate level, or another exceptional circumstance based on the considerations mentioned under 4.5; and 4.8.2 Vice-President, Academics’ recommendation and President’s approval of a rationalization in writing, stipulating the reason for an exemption from the policy. 4.9 Current Academic Members not holding the required Academic Credentials for their respective Program may be offered the opportunity to develop an academic development plan. The plan will include a mutually agreed upon timeline for meeting the established Academic and Professional Credential requirements for the academic Courses they teach. Academic development plans must be completed within three (3) years from the date of approval by the President. The University will not be responsible for bearing any costs or expenses associated with the academic development plan unless otherwise approved by the President. 5.0 Procedures 5.1 The Vice-President, Academics will ensure that procedures are developed for the implementation of this policy. 6.0 Related Documents 6.1 PL-AC-02: Academic Credentials Policy. 6.2 PR-AC-03: Assigning Academic Ranks to Academic Members Procedure. PL-AC-03: Academic Qualifications Policy © February 2022