ACADEMIC ANNUAL LEAVE POLICY Policy1.0 Definitions 1.1 The following words and expressions shall have the meanings hereby assigned to them: 1.1.1 Academic Calendar: A representation of the periods associated with the University’s operations, containing the teaching periods, exam and holiday dates, and key deadlines, which is approved by the University’s Board of Trustees. 1.1.2 Academic Management: Academic Members assigned administrative duties of a: President, Vice President, Associate Vice President, Academic Manager, Director, Dean, Associate/Assistant Dean, Department Head, Program Head and other Heads (as applicable). 1.1.3 Faculty Members: members of the teaching and/or research staff, whether on part- or full-time, holding the following titles: Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Senior Lecturer/Senior Technical Instructor, or Lecturer/Technical Instructor. 1.1.4 Instructional Members: Members of the teaching staff, whether on part- or full-time, holding the following titles: Assistant Lecturer/or Workshop/Lab/Clinical Instructor, Assistant Technical Instructor, Trades Technical Instructor, or Teaching Assistant. 1.1.5 University: University of Doha for Science and Technology established by Emiri Resolution No. 13 of 2022. 1.2 Where the context requires, words importing the singular shall include the plural and vice-versa. 1.3 Where a word or phrase is given a particular meaning, other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or phrase have corresponding meanings. 2.0 Policy Purpose 2.1 This policy outlines the requirement for Academic Members’ annual leave. 3.0 Policy Scope 3.1 This policy applies to all full-time Academic Members at the University. 4.0 Policy Statement 4.1 As an academic institution with a mandate to deliver educational programs on an established annual semester system, Academic Members’ annual leave is, first and foremost, governed by the Academic Calendar. 4.2 Academic Members are entitled to paid annual leave for the number of days specified and published in the Academic Calendar. In the event an Academic Member commences their duties during the academic year, they will be entitled to leave for fractions of the year in proportion to the period of their service. Annual leave taken outside of the prescribed periods must be pre-authorized, and is unpaid. 4.3 Annual summer leave for members of the Academic Management commences at least one week after the leave specified for Academic Members who are not assigned administrative duties, and continues until at least one week before Academic Members resume their duties. 4.4 Academic Members are entitled to the authorized leaves of absence, which are prescribed for them in the University’s Human Capital policies pertaining to Academic Members. 4.5 Academic Members performing pre-authorized work during their annual leave are entitled to overtime compensation, in accordance with the Teaching Overload and Academic Overtime Compensation Policy. 4.6 Annual leave is not accrued by Academic Members. 5.0 Procedures 5.1 The Vice-President, Academics will ensure that procedures are developed and implemented in accordance with this policy. 6.0 Related Documents 6.1 Academic Calendar. 6.2 HR Policy. PL-AC-06: Academic Annual Leave Policy © June 2019