PROGRAM ACCREDITATION POLICY APA Formatted Text1.0 Definitions 1.1 The following words and expressions shall have the meanings hereby assigned to them: 1.1.1 Academic Members : Faculty Members and Instructional Members. 1.1.2 Academic Unit : An entity within the University that delivers Courses for Programs or for entry into Programs. 1.1.3 Accreditation : Official certification that an Academic Unit, Program, or Course has met specific educational standards set by external regulators. 1.1.4 Course : A set of Learning Sessions in a particular subject area with a defined scope and duration, and specific Learning Outcomes. 1.1.5 Course Learning Outcome : The specifications of what the Student should learn as the result of the specified and supported study in a given Course. 1.1.6 Faculty Members : Members of the teaching and/or research staff, whether on part- or full-time, holding the following titles: Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Senior Lecturer/Senior Technical Instructor, or Lecturer/Technical Instructor. 1.1.7 Instructional Members : Members of the teaching staff, whether on part- or full-time, holding the following titles: Assistant Lecturer/or Workshop/Lab/Clinical Instructor, Assistant Technical Instructor, Trades Technical Instructor, or Teaching Assistant. 1.1.8 Learning Session : Classes, labs, placements, or work term prescribed by a Course. 1.1.9 Program : A prescribed set of Courses leading to a qualification, including a Certificate, Diploma (2 years), Advanced Diploma (3 years), Bachelor, Master, or Doctorate, according to the Qatar National Qualifications Framework. 1.1.10 Student : A person who is presently enrolled at the University in a credit course or who is designated by the University as a Student. 1.1.11 University : University of Doha for Science and Technology established by Emiri Resolution No. 13 of 2022. 1.1.12 University Community : Academic Members, members of the administrative staff, and/or Students. 1.2 Where the context requires, words importing the singular shall include the plural and vice-versa 1.3 Where a word or phrase is given a particular meaning, other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or phrase have corresponding meanings. 2.0 Policy Purpose 2.1 The purpose of this Policy is to ensure standardization in the preparation, approval, and submission of Accreditation documentation; communication of Accreditation decisions; and, compliance with Accreditation requirements. 3.0 Policy Scope 3.1 This Policy applies to: 3.1.1 Academic Members; 3.1.2 Credit and non-credit Programs seeking accreditation 4.0 Policy Statement 4.1 Every Academic Unit must seek international Accreditation of its Programs, where an Accrediting body is available. 4.2 Accreditation documentation are prepared in accordance with the Program Accreditation procedure(s), and must be reviewed and vetted prior to submission in accordance with the said procedures, by the Dean/Academic Manager of the given Academic Unit, the Academic Manager of Program Development and Academic Quality, and the Vice President Academic. 4.3 Communication 4.3.1 Accreditation decisions will be communicated by the Dean/Academic Manager of the Academic Unit to the Vice President Academic, Academic Members, and the University Community. 5.0 Procedures 5.1 The Vice-President, Academic will ensure that procedures are developed and implemented in accordance with this policy. 6.0 Related Documents 6.1 PR-AC-16: Operational Procedure - Program Accreditation 7.0 References and Acknowledgements 7.1 NA PL-AC-16: Program Accreditation Policy © April 2020